Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the reversal of anticoagulation and the bleeding patient.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the reversal of anticoagulation and the management of the bleeding
patient. Begin with protamine.
Protamine is the specific antagonist of heparin.
It is a positively charged protein that binds the negatively charged heparin
molecule, forming an inactive complex and so neutralising its anticoagulant effect,
used to reverse unfractionated heparin after cardiac and vascular surgery and in
heparin overdose.
The dose is calculated against the amount of heparin given,
roughly one milligram per hundred units of heparin,
titrated and guided by clotting tests such as the activated clotting time.
It only partially reverses the low-molecular-weight heparins,
because these are less avidly bound, and does not reverse fondaparinux.
Its own adverse effects are important:
given rapidly it causes hypotension and bradycardia,
and it can cause pulmonary hypertension and anaphylactoid and anaphylactic
reactions, with a higher risk in those exposed to protamine-containing insulins,
in fish allergy and after vasectomy.
So protamine neutralises heparin by binding it, dosed against the heparin given,
only partially reversing low-molecular-weight heparin,
and itself causing hypotension and anaphylaxis if given rapidly or in susceptible
patients.
Describe the reversal of warfarin.
Warfarin reversal depends on the urgency and the degree of over-anticoagulation.
Because warfarin acts by reducing the synthesis of clotting factors,
simply stopping it allows the international normalised ratio to fall over days.
Vitamin K, phytomenadione, restores the carboxylation of new factors and reverses
warfarin over hours, given orally for non-urgent and intravenously for more urgent
reversal, but it takes some hours to work and can make subsequent
re-anticoagulation difficult.
For immediate reversal in major or life-threatening bleeding,
the missing factors are replaced directly with prothrombin complex concentrate,
which contains the vitamin-K-dependent factors two, seven,
nine and ten and works within minutes,
given with intravenous vitamin K to sustain the reversal;
fresh frozen plasma is a less effective alternative where concentrate is
unavailable.
So warfarin is reversed by vitamin K over hours for non-urgent cases and,
for major bleeding, by prothrombin complex concentrate for immediate factor
replacement together with vitamin K.
Describe prothrombin complex concentrate and its advantages over fresh frozen
plasma.
Prothrombin complex concentrate is a concentrated preparation of the
vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors — two, seven,
nine and ten — with the natural anticoagulants proteins C and S,
derived from pooled plasma.
It is the treatment of choice for the immediate reversal of warfarin in major
bleeding and before emergency surgery,
and is used in some factor Xa inhibitor bleeding.
Its advantages over fresh frozen plasma are several:
it works within minutes by replacing the factors directly and in concentrated form;
it can be given rapidly in a small volume,
avoiding the large volume and the time needed to thaw and infuse fresh frozen
plasma, which is important in the patient at risk of fluid overload;
and it provides a reliable, standardised factor content.
Its risks are thrombosis and, being a blood product,
the small risk of transmission. So prothrombin complex concentrate gives rapid,
concentrated, low-volume factor replacement,
making it superior to fresh frozen plasma for urgent warfarin reversal.
Describe the specific reversal agents for the direct oral anticoagulants.
The direct oral anticoagulants now have specific antidotes,
which was a notable gap when they were introduced.
Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran,
the direct thrombin inhibitor, with very high affinity,
neutralising it within minutes, used for life-threatening bleeding or urgent
surgery in a patient on dabigatran.
Andexanet alfa is a modified, inactive form of factor ten-a that acts as a decoy,
binding and sequestering the direct factor ten-a inhibitors — rivaroxaban and
apixaban — reversing their effect.
Where these specific agents are unavailable,
prothrombin complex concentrate is used to reverse the factor Xa inhibitors by
providing factors to overcome the block.
So idarucizumab specifically reverses dabigatran,
and andexanet alfa the factor Xa inhibitors,
with prothrombin complex concentrate as the non-specific alternative for the Xa
inhibitors, giving the direct oral anticoagulants the reversibility they initially
lacked.
Describe tranexamic acid.
Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug, not strictly a reversal agent,
but central to managing bleeding.
It is a synthetic analogue of lysine that blocks the binding of plasminogen to
fibrin, preventing its activation to plasmin and so inhibiting the breakdown of the
clot — fibrinolysis — thereby stabilising clot and reducing bleeding.
It has been shown in large trials to reduce mortality from bleeding in trauma,
given early, in the CRASH-2 trial, and to reduce death in postpartum haemorrhage in
the WOMAN trial, and it reduces blood loss and transfusion in surgery.
It is given intravenously, and early administration is important in trauma.
Its cautions include a theoretical thrombotic risk and seizures at high doses.
So tranexamic acid inhibits fibrinolysis by blocking plasminogen,
reducing bleeding and improving survival in trauma and obstetric haemorrhage and
reducing surgical blood loss, a key drug in the bleeding patient distinct from the
specific anticoagulant antidotes.
What is the role of desmopressin and of blood-product replacement in bleeding?
Desmopressin, a synthetic analogue of antidiuretic hormone,
raises plasma levels of von Willebrand factor and factor eight by releasing them
from endothelial stores, improving platelet adhesion;
it is used in mild haemophilia A and von Willebrand disease and to improve the
platelet dysfunction of uraemia and, sometimes, of antiplatelet drugs.
Among blood products, fresh frozen plasma replaces clotting factors broadly,
cryoprecipitate provides concentrated fibrinogen and is used when fibrinogen is
low, and platelet transfusion is given for thrombocytopenia or significant platelet
dysfunction, including to counter antiplatelet drugs in major bleeding.
These are used as guided by the clinical picture and by laboratory and viscoelastic
testing in major haemorrhage.
So desmopressin improves platelet and von Willebrand function in specific disorders
and uraemia, and fresh frozen plasma,
cryoprecipitate and platelets replace the deficient components of haemostasis,
all part of managing major bleeding alongside specific reversal.
How would you approach the actively bleeding anticoagulated patient?
I would manage it systematically and urgently.
First, the general resuscitation of major haemorrhage: stopping the offending drug,
securing the airway, supporting the circulation,
and activating the major haemorrhage protocol with balanced transfusion,
while controlling the source of bleeding surgically or by intervention.
Second, laboratory and point-of-care testing — the full blood count,
clotting screen, fibrinogen, and viscoelastic testing — to characterise the defect.
Third, identify the anticoagulant and give the specific reversal:
protamine for heparin; vitamin K and prothrombin complex concentrate for warfarin;
idarucizumab for dabigatran; andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for
the factor Xa inhibitors; and platelets, with consideration of desmopressin,
for antiplatelet drugs.
Tranexamic acid is given to reduce bleeding.
So I would resuscitate, control the source, test the defect,
and give the specific antidote and supportive blood components together with
tranexamic acid, a structured approach to the bleeding anticoagulated patient.
How is the patient on anticoagulants managed for emergency surgery?
For emergency surgery in the anticoagulated patient I would weigh the urgency of
surgery against the bleeding risk and reverse anticoagulation appropriately,
in discussion with haematology.
I would establish what drug was taken and when,
and obtain clotting tests including, where available, specific assays.
If surgery can wait, I would allow the drug to wear off — by its known offset for
the direct oral anticoagulants, or by allowing the international normalised ratio
to fall.
If it cannot, I would reverse: prothrombin complex concentrate and vitamin K for
warfarin; idarucizumab for dabigatran;
andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for the factor Xa inhibitors;
protamine for heparin.
I would have blood products and tranexamic acid available,
anticipate increased bleeding, and avoid neuraxial techniques where the
anticoagulant has not been adequately cleared or reversed.
So emergency surgery on anticoagulants requires identifying the drug,
reversing it appropriately or allowing for its offset, and preparing for bleeding,
guided by testing and haematology advice.
What are the particular hazards of the reversal agents themselves?
The reversal agents are not without risk.
Protamine causes hypotension and bradycardia if given rapidly,
and pulmonary hypertension and anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions,
with a higher risk in fish allergy,
after vasectomy and in those exposed to protamine-containing insulins,
and an excess can itself have an anticoagulant effect.
Prothrombin complex concentrate and the factor concentrates carry a thrombotic
risk, replacing the very factors the anticoagulation was suppressing,
particularly relevant in the patient who was anticoagulated for a thrombotic
indication.
Andexanet alfa likewise carries thrombotic risk.
Vitamin K given to reverse warfarin can make subsequent re-anticoagulation
difficult for days. Restoring haemostasis re-exposes the patient to the thrombotic
risk that anticoagulation was treating.
So the reversal agents carry their own hazards — anaphylaxis and hypotension with
protamine, thrombosis with the factor concentrates and andexanet — and reversal
reinstates the underlying thrombotic risk,
all to be weighed against the bleeding being treated.
Pull it together: how do you approach reversal of anticoagulation rationally?
I would identify the specific anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug and match the
reversal to it, recognising that the urgency — life-threatening bleeding or
emergency surgery versus a less pressing situation — determines whether to give a
specific antidote or simply to stop the drug and allow its offset.
For heparin I would use protamine, given slowly and cautiously; for warfarin,
vitamin K for non-urgent reversal and prothrombin complex concentrate with vitamin
K for major bleeding; for dabigatran, idarucizumab; for the factor Xa inhibitors,
andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate; and for antiplatelet drugs,
platelets and desmopressin in major bleeding.
I would add tranexamic acid and replace blood components as guided by testing,
control the source, and weigh the reinstated thrombotic risk and the hazards of the
agents themselves.
So rational reversal is drug-specific, urgency-led,
supported by blood components and tranexamic acid,
and mindful of the thrombotic consequences of reversing.
Detail the dosing of protamine and the phenomenon of heparin rebound.
Protamine is dosed against the quantity of heparin to be neutralised,
approximately one milligram of protamine for every hundred units of unfractionated
heparin remaining active, with the calculation adjusted for the time since the
heparin was given as it is cleared,
and titrated to clotting tests such as the activated clotting time in cardiac
surgery.
It is given slowly to avoid its haemodynamic effects.
Heparin rebound is the phenomenon whereby anticoagulation recurs some hours after
apparently adequate reversal, because protamine, with its shorter half-life,
is cleared while heparin sequestered in tissues is released back into the
circulation, so the heparin effect reappears;
it is managed by recognising recurrent bleeding or prolonged clotting and giving
further protamine.
So protamine is dosed at roughly one milligram per hundred units of active heparin,
titrated to clotting tests and given slowly,
and heparin rebound — the later return of heparin effect — may require a further
dose, a recognised pitfall after cardiac surgery.
Classify the adverse reactions to protamine.
Protamine reactions are classically described in three types.
The first is the common, dose- and rate-related hypotension from rapid
administration, due to systemic vasodilatation and a transient myocardial
depressant effect, minimised by slow injection.
The second is a true anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reaction,
an immune or histamine-mediated response with the features of anaphylaxis,
more likely in sensitised patients — those previously exposed to protamine,
including in protamine-containing insulins such as the older neutral protamine
Hagedorn insulin, those with fish allergy as protamine derives from fish sperm,
and men who have had a vasectomy and may have anti-sperm antibodies.
The third is a catastrophic pulmonary vasoconstriction with pulmonary hypertension
and right ventricular failure, a rare but life-threatening reaction.
So protamine reactions are classified into rate-related hypotension,
anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions in sensitised patients,
and the rare catastrophic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
which together demand slow administration and vigilance,
particularly in the susceptible.
Distinguish four-factor and three-factor prothrombin complex concentrate and
activated forms.
Prothrombin complex concentrates differ in their factor content.
The four-factor concentrate contains all four vitamin-K-dependent factors — two,
seven, nine and ten — with proteins C and S,
and is the preparation of choice for reversing warfarin,
since it replaces all the depleted factors.
The three-factor concentrate contains little factor seven,
so it reverses warfarin less completely and may need supplementary factor seven.
There is also an activated prothrombin complex concentrate,
containing activated factors, known by the trade name FEIBA,
used as a bypassing agent in haemophilia with inhibitors and sometimes considered
for factor Xa inhibitor reversal.
The choice for warfarin reversal is the four-factor concentrate.
So the four-factor concentrate, containing all four factors,
is preferred for warfarin reversal;
the three-factor concentrate lacks adequate factor seven;
and the activated concentrate is a bypassing agent for haemophilia with inhibitors
— distinctions that matter when selecting a product for urgent reversal.
What is the place of recombinant activated factor VII?
Recombinant activated factor seven is a potent procoagulant that,
at the site of tissue injury and on activated platelets,
directly drives thrombin generation.
Its licensed use is in haemophilia with inhibitors,
where it bypasses the deficient factors, and in some rare factor deficiencies.
Beyond this, it has been used off-licence as a last-resort haemostatic agent in
catastrophic, refractory haemorrhage unresponsive to conventional measures,
and was explored in trauma and surgical bleeding.
However, its off-licence use is limited by an associated risk of arterial
thrombosis, including stroke and myocardial infarction, and by uncertain benefit,
so it is reserved for exceptional, refractory bleeding after standard measures and
blood-product replacement have been optimised,
often with specialist haematology advice.
So recombinant activated factor seven is a powerful procoagulant for haemophilia
with inhibitors, used only as a last resort in refractory haemorrhage because of
its thrombotic risk and uncertain benefit — not a routine reversal agent.
Compare fibrinogen concentrate and cryoprecipitate.
Both replace fibrinogen, which is consumed in major haemorrhage and falls early,
and which is essential for clot formation.
Cryoprecipitate is the cold-precipitated fraction of plasma, containing fibrinogen,
factor eight, von Willebrand factor and factor thirteen;
it has traditionally been the source of fibrinogen in bleeding but is a pooled
blood product requiring thawing and group compatibility,
with a variable fibrinogen content.
Fibrinogen concentrate is a purified, pasteurised,
standardised preparation of fibrinogen that can be reconstituted and given rapidly
in a small volume with a known dose, without thawing or cross-matching,
and with a lower infectious risk.
Guided by fibrinogen levels or viscoelastic testing,
fibrinogen concentrate is increasingly used in major haemorrhage,
though cryoprecipitate remains the standard source in some systems.
So both replace fibrinogen, but fibrinogen concentrate offers a standardised,
rapidly available, low-volume, safer alternative to cryoprecipitate,
increasingly favoured and guided by point-of-care testing.
How does viscoelastic testing guide the management of bleeding?
Viscoelastic testing — thromboelastography and rotational thromboelastometry —
provides a rapid, point-of-care, whole-blood assessment of the dynamics of clot
formation, strength and breakdown, displayed as a trace,
in contrast to conventional laboratory tests that are slower and assess only
isolated parts of coagulation.
It shows the time to clot initiation, reflecting clotting-factor activity;
the rate and strength of clot development, reflecting fibrinogen and platelets;
and any premature breakdown, reflecting fibrinolysis.
This allows targeted, goal-directed treatment of the bleeding patient — giving
clotting factors, fibrinogen, platelets or an antifibrinolytic according to the
specific defect identified, rather than empirically — which reduces unnecessary
transfusion and improves outcomes in cardiac surgery,
trauma and obstetric haemorrhage.
So viscoelastic testing rapidly characterises the whole clotting process at the
bedside, enabling goal-directed correction of the specific deficit — factors,
fibrinogen, platelets or fibrinolysis — a central tool in the modern management of
major haemorrhage.
Describe the structure of a major haemorrhage protocol.
A major haemorrhage protocol is a pre-agreed,
rapidly activated institutional response to catastrophic bleeding,
designed to deliver blood and components quickly and in balance while the cause is
controlled.
On activation it mobilises the laboratory and porters and delivers packs of red
cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelets in fixed ratios approximating whole blood
— a balanced or damage-control transfusion strategy — until laboratory or
viscoelastic guidance can tailor therapy.
It incorporates the early administration of tranexamic acid,
the replacement of fibrinogen, the monitoring and correction of calcium, potassium,
temperature and acid-base, and the avoidance of the lethal triad of hypothermia,
acidosis and coagulopathy.
It emphasises communication, a team leader, and control of the bleeding source.
So a major haemorrhage protocol delivers balanced blood-component replacement with
early tranexamic acid and fibrinogen, guided by testing,
with correction of calcium and the avoidance of the lethal triad,
all coordinated to support resuscitation while the bleeding source is controlled.
Detail the use of tranexamic acid, including in trauma and head injury.
Tranexamic acid, the antifibrinolytic, has a strong evidence base in bleeding.
In trauma, the CRASH-2 trial showed that giving it early — within three hours of
injury — reduced death due to bleeding,
with benefit lost or possibly reversed if given later,
so it is given early in significant trauma.
In the subsequent CRASH-3 trial in traumatic brain injury,
it reduced head-injury-related death in patients with mild-to-moderate injury given
early, suggesting a role in traumatic intracranial bleeding.
In obstetric haemorrhage the WOMAN trial showed reduced death from bleeding.
It reduces blood loss and transfusion in elective surgery,
including cardiac and orthopaedic. It is given intravenously as a bolus and
sometimes an infusion.
So tranexamic acid is given early in trauma per CRASH-2,
has a role in traumatic brain injury per CRASH-3,
reduces death in postpartum haemorrhage per WOMAN,
and reduces surgical bleeding — with early administration the consistent theme — a
cornerstone drug in haemorrhage management.
What is the role of desmopressin and of calcium in bleeding management?
Both have specific supportive roles.
Desmopressin releases von Willebrand factor and factor eight from endothelial
stores, improving platelet adhesion and clotting,
and is used to improve haemostasis in mild haemophilia A and von Willebrand
disease, in the platelet dysfunction of uraemia,
and sometimes to counter antiplatelet-drug effect;
its effect diminishes with repeated doses as stores are depleted — tachyphylaxis —
and it causes hyponatraemia and facial flushing.
Calcium is essential because it is a cofactor — factor four — at several steps of
the coagulation cascade, and in massive transfusion the citrate anticoagulant in
stored blood chelates calcium, causing hypocalcaemia that impairs clotting and
cardiac function, so ionised calcium is monitored and replaced during major
transfusion.
So desmopressin boosts von Willebrand factor for specific platelet and factor
disorders, and calcium must be monitored and replaced in massive transfusion to
maintain coagulation and cardiac function — both important adjuncts in managing the
bleeding patient.
Summarise the integrated management of the major haemorrhage in an anticoagulated
patient.
I would manage it as a coordinated emergency.
I would activate the major haemorrhage protocol,
resuscitate with balanced blood components,
control the bleeding source surgically or by intervention,
and prevent the lethal triad of hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy,
monitoring and correcting calcium.
I would give tranexamic acid early.
I would characterise the defect with laboratory and viscoelastic testing and
correct it in a goal-directed way — fibrinogen concentrate or cryoprecipitate for
low fibrinogen, platelets for thrombocytopenia or antiplatelet effect,
factors as needed.
I would identify the anticoagulant and give the specific reversal — protamine for
heparin, given slowly; vitamin K and four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate
for warfarin; idarucizumab for dabigatran;
andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for the factor Xa inhibitors;
platelets and desmopressin for antiplatelets.
I would then weigh the reinstated thrombotic risk and plan re-anticoagulation.
So management integrates resuscitation, source control,
goal-directed component therapy, tranexamic acid and drug-specific reversal.
When and how should anticoagulation be restarted after bleeding or surgery?
Restarting anticoagulation after a bleed or surgery requires balancing the risk of
recurrent bleeding against the thrombotic risk for which the drug was prescribed,
and it is a difficult, individualised decision.
The timing depends on the indication's thrombotic risk — higher for a mechanical
valve or recent thromboembolism — the bleeding risk of the site,
particularly the catastrophic risk of re-bleeding in intracranial haemorrhage,
and the achievement of haemostasis.
In general, anticoagulation is resumed once haemostasis is secure and the bleeding
risk has fallen, after a longer interval for high-bleeding-risk situations such as
intracranial haemorrhage and a shorter one where thrombotic risk is high;
prophylactic doses may be reintroduced before treatment doses.
The decision is often multidisciplinary.
So restarting anticoagulation balances recurrent-bleeding against thrombotic risk,
timed by the indication, the bleeding site and secured haemostasis — cautiously and
often later after intracranial haemorrhage, sooner where thrombotic risk is high.
How is anticoagulant-associated intracranial haemorrhage managed?
Anticoagulant-associated intracranial haemorrhage is a neurosurgical emergency in
which rapid, complete reversal of anticoagulation is critical,
because continued anticoagulation allows the haematoma to expand, worsening outcome.
The anticoagulant is identified and reversed immediately with the specific agent:
four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate with intravenous vitamin K for
warfarin; idarucizumab for dabigatran;
andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for the factor Xa inhibitors;
and protamine for heparin.
The blood pressure is controlled, the international normalised ratio or relevant
test rechecked to confirm reversal, and neurosurgical assessment obtained.
Supportive neuroprotective measures are instituted.
The later decision on whether and when to restart anticoagulation is especially
fraught given the high re-bleeding risk.
So anticoagulant-associated intracranial haemorrhage demands immediate, complete,
drug-specific reversal to limit haematoma expansion,
with blood-pressure control and neurosurgical involvement — the setting where rapid
reversal matters most.
What is the role of cell salvage in managing blood loss?
Cell salvage is a technique that reduces the need for allogeneic transfusion by
collecting blood lost during surgery, washing and concentrating the red cells,
and returning them to the patient.
The shed blood is aspirated, anticoagulated, washed to remove plasma,
anticoagulant, debris and activated factors,
and the concentrated red cells are reinfused.
It is valuable in surgery with significant anticipated blood loss — cardiac,
major vascular, orthopaedic and obstetric — conserving the patient's own red cells,
avoiding the risks of donor blood, and being acceptable to some patients who
decline donor transfusion, such as some Jehovah's Witnesses if the circuit is
continuous.
Its limitations are that it returns red cells but not clotting factors or
platelets, which must be replaced separately,
and cautions exist regarding contamination,
for example with malignancy or infection,
addressed by techniques such as leucocyte filtration.
So cell salvage washes and returns the patient's own shed red cells,
reducing allogeneic transfusion in high-blood-loss surgery,
but provides red cells alone, so factors and platelets are replaced separately.
Explain damage-control resuscitation and the lethal triad.
Damage-control resuscitation is the modern approach to major traumatic haemorrhage,
aiming to limit the coagulopathy and physiological derangement of massive bleeding
while definitive surgical control is achieved.
Its principles are permissive hypotension — accepting a lower blood pressure until
bleeding is controlled, to avoid dislodging clot and worsening bleeding,
except where brain injury requires perfusion;
haemostatic resuscitation — transfusing balanced ratios of red cells,
plasma and platelets rather than crystalloid,
with early fibrinogen and tranexamic acid; and rapid damage-control surgery.
It explicitly seeks to prevent the lethal triad of hypothermia,
acidosis and coagulopathy, a vicious cycle in which each worsens the others —
hypothermia and acidosis impair clotting enzymes and platelets,
the resulting coagulopathy prolongs bleeding,
and continued bleeding and transfusion deepen the hypothermia and acidosis.
So damage-control resuscitation uses permissive hypotension,
balanced haemostatic transfusion and rapid surgery to interrupt the lethal triad of
hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy in major haemorrhage.
Describe the antifibrinolytics beyond tranexamic acid.
Tranexamic acid is the dominant antifibrinolytic, but others have been used.
Aminocaproic acid is a related lysine analogue that, like tranexamic acid,
blocks the binding of plasminogen to fibrin, inhibiting fibrinolysis;
it is less potent and less used.
Aprotinin is a serine protease inhibitor that inhibits plasmin and other proteases,
and was widely used to reduce bleeding in cardiac surgery;
it was withdrawn after analyses suggested an association with increased mortality
and renal injury, then reintroduced in some places under restriction for selected
high-bleeding-risk cardiac surgery after re-evaluation.
These agents share the principle of reducing bleeding by inhibiting clot breakdown,
but tranexamic acid, with its strong evidence base and good safety profile,
is the agent of choice.
So beyond tranexamic acid, aminocaproic acid is a weaker lysine analogue and
aprotinin a protease inhibitor with a chequered safety history,
all antifibrinolytics, but tranexamic acid remains the preferred drug for reducing
bleeding by inhibiting fibrinolysis.
What are the indications and limitations of fresh frozen plasma and platelet
transfusion?
Both replace components of haemostasis but have important limitations.
Fresh frozen plasma contains all the clotting factors and is used to replace them
in coagulopathy with bleeding, particularly where multiple factors are deficient,
as in liver disease or massive transfusion,
and where a specific concentrate is unavailable;
its limitations are that it must be thawed and group-matched,
requires a large volume to raise factor levels,
risks circulatory overload and transfusion-related acute lung injury,
and is a slower, less precise means of factor replacement than concentrates.
Platelet transfusion is given for significant thrombocytopenia with bleeding,
or to counter antiplatelet drugs in major or critical-site bleeding,
with thresholds higher for active bleeding or neuraxial procedures than for
prophylaxis.
So fresh frozen plasma broadly replaces factors but is volume-heavy,
slow and carries transfusion risks,
while platelets are given for thrombocytopenic or antiplatelet-related bleeding to
thresholds set by the situation — supportive components guided by testing in major
haemorrhage.
How is the bleeding patient on dabigatran managed if idarucizumab is unavailable?
Idarucizumab is the specific antidote for dabigatran,
but if it is unavailable other measures are used,
exploiting dabigatran's pharmacology.
Because dabigatran is predominantly renally excreted and has relatively low protein
binding, it is dialysable, so haemodialysis can remove a significant proportion of
the drug in severe bleeding or before urgent surgery,
particularly in renal impairment where it accumulates.
Activated charcoal may reduce absorption if the drug was taken recently.
General measures of major-haemorrhage management apply — source control,
balanced transfusion, tranexamic acid and supportive blood components — and
prothrombin complex concentrate, including the activated form,
may be tried to support haemostasis,
though it does not specifically reverse dabigatran.
So in the absence of idarucizumab, dabigatran can be removed by haemodialysis,
with activated charcoal for recent ingestion,
alongside general haemorrhage management and prothrombin complex concentrate as a
non-specific measure — reflecting dabigatran's dialysable,
renally cleared pharmacology.
What are the cautions and contraindications of tranexamic acid?
Tranexamic acid is generally safe and beneficial, but it has cautions.
As an antifibrinolytic that stabilises clot,
there is a theoretical concern about promoting thrombosis,
though large trials in trauma and obstetric haemorrhage have not shown a
significant increase in thrombotic events with early use;
nonetheless it is used cautiously where there is active intravascular clotting.
It is contraindicated or used with great caution in disseminated intravascular
coagulation without adequate control,
and in a history of seizures or at high doses,
because it can lower the seizure threshold and high doses are associated with
seizures, particularly in cardiac surgery.
It is renally excreted, so the dose is reduced in renal impairment.
It should not be given into the cerebrospinal fluid.
So tranexamic acid's cautions are a theoretical thrombotic risk,
the seizure risk at high doses, dose reduction in renal impairment,
and avoidance of intrathecal administration — a safe drug used with awareness of
these limits.
How is the adequacy of reversal confirmed and monitored?
Confirming reversal depends on the drug and the available tests.
For warfarin, the international normalised ratio is rechecked after prothrombin
complex concentrate and vitamin K to confirm it has normalised,
recognising that the short half-life of the replaced factor seven means vitamin K
is needed to sustain the reversal.
For heparin, the activated clotting time or activated partial thromboplastin time
confirms neutralisation by protamine, with vigilance for heparin rebound.
For the direct oral anticoagulants, routine tests are unreliable,
but specific assays — a dilute thrombin time or anti-factor-ten-a assay calibrated
to the drug — can assess residual effect where available.
Viscoelastic testing gives a global picture of clot formation and can guide ongoing
component therapy. Clinically, the cessation of bleeding is the ultimate endpoint.
So reversal is confirmed by the international normalised ratio for warfarin,
clotting times for heparin, specific assays for the direct agents where available,
and viscoelastic testing and clinical haemostasis overall — monitoring tailored to
the drug.
Give a final synthesis of the principles of reversing anticoagulation.
The principles are to identify the drug, judge the urgency,
give the specific reversal, support haemostasis, and weigh the consequences.
I would establish which anticoagulant or antiplatelet was taken and when,
and whether the situation is life-threatening bleeding or urgent surgery,
since this determines whether to give a specific antidote or merely to stop the
drug and allow its offset.
I would give the matched reversal — protamine for heparin,
vitamin K and four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate for warfarin,
idarucizumab for dabigatran, andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for
the factor Xa inhibitors, platelets and desmopressin for antiplatelets — add
tranexamic acid, and replace fibrinogen,
platelets and factors guided by viscoelastic testing within a major-haemorrhage
protocol, while controlling the source and preventing the lethal triad.
I would confirm reversal, then carefully balance the reinstated thrombotic risk in
deciding when to re-anticoagulate. So reversal is drug-specific, urgency-led,
testing-guided, and mindful of the thrombotic consequences of reversing.
What is the role of point-of-care testing in directing reversal and transfusion?
Point-of-care testing has become central to directing the management of the
bleeding patient, including the reversal of anticoagulation,
because it gives rapid, near-patient results that allow targeted rather than
empirical treatment.
Viscoelastic tests — thromboelastography and rotational thromboelastometry —
characterise clot initiation, strength and breakdown within minutes,
indicating whether the defect is in clotting factors, fibrinogen,
platelets or fibrinolysis, and so guiding the choice between prothrombin complex
concentrate, fibrinogen, platelets and tranexamic acid.
Point-of-care measures of haemoglobin, blood gases, lactate, calcium and,
increasingly, specific anticoagulant assays further refine treatment and monitor
the lethal triad.
This goal-directed approach reduces unnecessary transfusion and improves outcomes
compared with fixed empirical regimens.
So point-of-care testing, especially viscoelastic testing,
directs reversal and transfusion by rapidly identifying the specific defect,
enabling targeted correction and monitoring — a key element of modern haemorrhage
and reversal management.
How does the management differ for a patient on antiplatelet rather than
anticoagulant drugs who is bleeding?
The two require different approaches because they act on different parts of
haemostasis.
For the bleeding patient on anticoagulants, which inhibit the coagulation cascade,
reversal targets the cascade — protamine,
vitamin K and prothrombin complex concentrate,
or the specific direct-oral-anticoagulant antidotes.
For the bleeding patient on antiplatelet drugs, which impair platelet function,
there is no simple specific antidote;
management centres on platelet transfusion to provide functional platelets,
particularly important in major or critical-site bleeding such as intracranial
haemorrhage, recognising that transfused platelets may be partly inhibited by
residual drug, especially the reversible agent ticagrelor.
Desmopressin may improve platelet function.
Tranexamic acid and general haemorrhage measures apply to both.
So the bleeding anticoagulated patient is managed by cascade-directed reversal
agents, whereas the bleeding antiplatelet patient is managed chiefly by platelet
transfusion and desmopressin, reflecting the platelet-versus-cascade distinction
between the two drug classes.
What practical preparations ensure timely reversal is available when needed?
Timely reversal depends on preparation and systems, not only on knowing the drugs.
The institution should have clear, accessible protocols for the reversal of each
anticoagulant and a major-haemorrhage protocol,
with the reversal agents — protamine, vitamin K, prothrombin complex concentrate,
and the specific direct-oral-anticoagulant antidotes where stocked — readily
available in the pharmacy or blood bank and their locations known.
There must be rapid access to laboratory and point-of-care testing and to blood
components, and a means to determine quickly which anticoagulant a patient takes
and when it was last taken, through history, records and medication-alert systems.
Staff should be trained in the protocols, and haematology advice readily obtainable.
So timely reversal is ensured by having protocols, stocked and located antidotes,
rapid testing and component access,
reliable drug-history information and trained staff — the systems that turn
knowledge of reversal into prompt action when catastrophic bleeding occurs.
Thank you. That concludes a thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Protamine neutralises heparin by binding it (about 1 mg per 100 units,
titrated to clotting tests), only partially reverses LMWH and not fondaparinux,
and itself causes hypotension, bradycardia,
pulmonary hypertension and anaphylaxis (higher risk with fish allergy,
prior protamine-insulin, vasectomy) if given rapidly or in susceptible patients.
Second, Warfarin is reversed by vitamin K over hours (oral or IV) for non-urgent
cases and, for major bleeding, by prothrombin complex concentrate (factors II, VII,
IX, X) within minutes plus vitamin K; PCC is superior to FFP — rapid, concentrated,
low-volume and standardised.
Third, The DOACs have specific antidotes:
idarucizumab (a monoclonal Fab) for dabigatran,
and andexanet alfa (a factor Xa decoy) for the factor Xa inhibitors,
with prothrombin complex concentrate as the non-specific alternative for the Xa
inhibitors.
Fourth, Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic (blocks plasminogen binding to
fibrin) that reduces bleeding and improves survival in trauma (CRASH-2,
given early) and postpartum haemorrhage (WOMAN), and reduces surgical blood loss;
desmopressin raises von Willebrand factor/factor VIII for mild haemophilia A,
von Willebrand disease and uraemic platelet dysfunction.
Fifth, In the bleeding anticoagulated patient:
resuscitate and activate the major haemorrhage protocol, control the source,
test the defect (including viscoelastic testing),
give the drug-specific antidote plus blood components and tranexamic acid,
and weigh the reinstated thrombotic risk and the hazards of the reversal agents
themselves.
Thank you. That concludes the station.